## About Repositories for the Hildon Application Manager

### Basic repository setup

The Hildon Application Manager ("AM") can deal with any repository
that "apt-get" can understand.  However, the AM only shows 'user'
packages to the user.  A user packages is identified by being in the
"user" section; see [here](packaging.html).

Also, when adding a new repository manually, the AM provides default
values for certain parts of a sources.list line.  You might want to
take this into account when laying out your repository so that users
have it easy when configuring it.

The distribution will default to the symbolic name of the distribution
that is installed on the device.  This symbolic name is referred to as
${dist} in the sequel.  For maemo 2.0, this is "mistral"; for maemo
3.0, it is "bora".  The component list defaults to just "user".

Thus, unless you have a specific reason to use something else, it is
probably a good idea to have repositories that can be specified as

<pre>
deb URL ${dist} user
</pre>

so that the user only has to enter URL into the "New Catalogue"
dialog.

How to actually setup a repository is explained in the [Debian
Repository
HOWTO](http://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/repository-howto/repository-howto).

### Trusted package sources

The AM can recognize certain package sources as 'trusted'.  Packages
coming from those sources are installed without showing the big fat
warning dialog to the user.  Also, updates to packages that have
originally been installed from a trusted source must come from the
same trusted source.

Right now, the AM knows only about one trusted source: signed
repositories.  Each repository that is signed with a known key is part
of the one trusted source.

In the future, the concept of a trusted source will likely be more
flexible.
